README.md, before:

# Plz 😸

_Say the magic word._

_Plz_ (pronounced "please") is a job runner targeted at running highly intensive
data processing jobs as simply, systematically, tidily and cheaply as possible.

At Prodo.AI, we use Plz to train our PyTorch-based machine learning models.

_Plz is an experimental product and is not guaranteed to be stable across
versions._

## Highlights

- simple command line interface
- cloud-agnostic architecture (on top of Docker), allowing you to run jobs
  locally, on bare metal, or on the cloud
  - Plz currently supports Amazon Web Services (AWS), but will most likely
    support other cloud providers in the future
  - full control of the type of cloud instance, allowing you to use whatever
    machine fits your job (and budget)
  - full support for NVIDIA GPUs, allowing you to run deep learning experiments
- common tooling support, with the following straight out of the box:
  - Python
  - Anaconda
  - PyTorch
- data-based workflow, so that you don't accidentally compute your model with
  the wrong input
- parameter awareness, so that you can run the same experiment with multiple
  sets of parameters
- full history, so that you can review your experiments over time
- useful examples provided (see the [Examples](#Examples) section)
- MIT-license allowing modification, distribution, private or commercial use
  (see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more details)
- open for contributions, plz

## Usage overview

We offer more details below on how to setup Plz and run your jobs, but we can
start by giving you an overview of what Plz does.

Plz offers a command-line interface. You start by adding a `plz.config.json`
file to the directory where you have your source code. This file contains, among
other things, the command you run to put your program to work (for instance,
`python3 main.py`). Then you can use Plz to run your program with `plz run`. The
following example (provided in this repository) demonstrates this:

```
sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz run
👌 Capturing the files in /home/sergio/plz/examples/pytorch
👌 Building the program snapshot
Step 1/4 : FROM prodoai/plz_ml-pytorch
# Executing 3 build triggers
 ---> Using cache
[...]
---> 9c39e889659d
Successfully built 9c39e889659d
Successfully tagged 024444204267.dkr.ecr.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/plz/builds:some-person-trying-pytorch-mnist-example-1541436382135
👌 Capturing the input
👌 983663 input bytes to upload
👌 Sending request to start execution
Instance status: querying availability
Instance status: requesting new instance
Instance status: pending
[...]
Instance status: starting container
Instance status: running
👌 Execution ID is: 55b66652-e11a-11e8-a36a-233ad251f4c1
👌 Streaming logs...
Using device: cuda
Epoch: 1. Training loss: 2.146302
Evaluation accuracy: 47.90 (max 0.00)
Best model found at epoch 1, with accurary 47.90
Epoch: 2. Training loss: 0.660179
Evaluation accuracy: 83.30 (max 47.90)
Best model found at epoch 2, with accurary 83.30
Epoch: 3. Training loss: 0.251717
Evaluation accuracy: 87.80 (max 83.30)
Best model found at epoch 3, with accurary 87.80
[...]
Epoch: 30. Training loss: 0.010750
Evaluation accuracy: 97.50 (max 98.10)
👌 Harvesting the output...
👌 Retrieving summary of measures (if present)...
{
  "max_accuracy": 98.1,
  "training_loss_at_max": 0.008485347032546997,
  "epoch_at_max": 25,
  "training_time": 43.3006055355072
}
👌 Execution succeeded.
👌 Retrieving the output...
le_net.pth
👌 Done and dusted.
```

From the above output, you'll see Plz do the following:

- Plz captures the files in your current directory. A snapshot of your code is
  built and stored in your infrastructure, so that you can retrieve the code
  used to run your job in the future (yes, you can specify files to be ignored,
  and you do so in the `plz.config.json`).
- It captures input data (as specified in the config) and uploads it. If you run
  another execution with the same input data, it will avoid uploading the data
  for a second time (based on timestamps and hashes).
- It starts an AWS instance, and waits until it's ready (or just runs the
  execution locally depending on the configuration).
- It streams the logs, just as if you were running your program directly.
- It shows metrics you collected during the run, such as _accuracy_ and _loss_
  (you can query those later).
- Finally, it downloads output files you might have created.

You can be patient and wait until it finishes, or you can hit `Ctrl+C` and stop
the program early:

```
Epoch: 9 Training loss: 0.330538
^C
👌 Your program is still running. To stream the logs, type:

        plz logs ad96b586-89e5-11e8-a7c5-8142e2563487
```

Plz runs your commands in a Docker container, either in your AWS infrastructure
or in your local machine, and so your actions in the terminal don't affect the
execution. If you are running this execution only, you can just type `plz logs`
and logs will be streamed from the current moment (unless you specify
`--since=start`, which will tell it to stream from the start of execution).

The big hexadecimal number you see in the output, next to `plz logs`, is the
execution ID you can use to refer to this execution. Plz remembers the last
execution that was _started_, and if you want to refer to that one you don't
need to include it in your command (you can just type `plz logs`). But if you
need to specify the execution ID, you can do `plz logs <execution-id>`.

Once your program has finished (or you've stopped it with `plz stop`) you can
run `plz output`, and it will download the files that your program has written.
In order to use this functionality, you need to tell your program to write to a
specific directory, which is provided to your program as an environment
variable. The files are saved under `output/<execution-id>` by default, but you
can specify the location with the `-p` option.

The instance will be kept there for some time (specified in `plz.config.json`)
in case you're running things interactively (so that you don't need to wait
while the instance goes through the startup process again).

You can use `plz describe` to print metadata about an execution in JSON format.
It's useful to tell one execution from another if you have several running at
the same time.

You can use `plz run --parameters a_json_file.json` to pass parameters to your
program. Passing parameters this way has two advantages:

- the parameters are stored in the metadata and can be queried (see the
  description of `plz history` below)
- you can use `plz rerun --override-parameters some_json_file.json` and run
  exactly the same execution but with different parameters, which helps running
  experiments in a systematic fashion.

There's also `plz history`, returning a JSON mapping from execution IDs to
metadata. If you write JSON files to a specific directory (see
`test/end-to-end/measures/simple`) they will be available in the metadata. You
can store things you've measured during your experiment (for instance, training
loss). Parameters will be in the metadata as well, so you can transform the
metadata using, for instance, [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/), and find
out how your training loss changed as you changed your parameters.

```
sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz history | \
    jq 'to_entries[] | { "execution_id": .key,
                         "learning_rate": .value.parameters.learning_rate,
                         "accuracy": .value.measures.summary.max_accuracy }'
{
  "execution_id": "dafcb478-e11e-11e8-9f2c-87dc520968d5",
  "learning_rate": 0.01,
  "accuracy": 98
}
{
  "execution_id": "9cfd3f1a-e1cf-11e8-9449-b1cc03bcdb5f",
  "learning_rate": 0.1,
  "accuracy": 98.5
}
{
  "execution_id": "c0d65d66-e1cf-11e8-8ed8-0d6f99ec4bc3",
  "learning_rate": 0.5,
  "accuracy": 13
}
```

In this example, you can see that increasing the learning rate from `0.01` to
`0.1` gives you an improvement in accuracy from 98% to 98.5%, but further
increasing the learning rate leads to a disastrous decrease to 13%.

You can run `plz list` to list the running executions, as well as any running
instances on AWS. It also shows the instance IDs. You can kill instances with
`plz kill -i <instance-id>`.

The command `plz last` is useful, particularly when writing shell commands, to
get the last execution _started_.

We also make it easy to manage dependencies for projects using Anaconda.
Projects using the image `prodoai/plz_ml-pytorch` need to have an
`environment.yml` file, as the one produced by `conda env export` (see
[the one in the Pytorch example](examples/pytorch/environment.yml)). This file
will be applied on top of
[the environment in the image](base-images/ml-pytorch/environment.yml).
Installation of dependencies is cached, so the process of dependency
installation occurs only the first time after you change the environment file.

### Functionality summary

Plz helps with the gruntwork around managing long-running tasks. It:

1. reruns previous jobs as to make sure the results are repeatable,
2. lets you customise parameters while keeping the work the same, and
3. provides a history including the result and parameters, so that you have
   experiment data in a structured format.

Plz also helps automate cloud-related tasks. It:

4. starts a "worker" (typically on AWS EC2, but also locally) to run your job,
5. packages your code, parameters and data and ships them to the worker,
6. runs your code,
7. saves the results (like losses) and outcomes (like models, but also the
   console output) so that you can back to them in the future, and
8. takes down the worker.

We build Plz following these principles:

- Code and data must be stored for future reference.
- Whatever part of the running environment can be captured by Plz, we capture it
  as to make jobs repeatable.
- Functionality is based on standard mechanisms like files and environment
  variables. You don't need to add extra dependencies to your code or learn how
  to read/write your data in specific ways.
- The tool must be flexible enough so that no unnecessary restrictions are
  imposed by the architecture. You should be able to do with Plz whatever you
  can do by running a program manually. It was surprising to find out how many
  issues, mostly around running jobs in the cloud, could be solved only by
  tweaking the configuration, without requiring any changes to the code.

Plz is routinely used at `prodo.ai` to train ML models on AWS, some of them
taking days to run in the most powerful instances available. We trust it to
start and terminate these instances as needed, and to manage our spot instances,
allowing us to get a much better price than if we were using on-demand instances
all the time.

## How does it work?

Plz consists of a _controller_ service and a _command-line interface_ (CLI) that
issues requests to the controller. The CLI is a Python executable, `plz`, which
takes instructions (such as `plz run ...`) as described above.

There are two configurations of the controller that are ready for you to use: in
one of them your jobs are run locally, while in the other one an AWS instance is
started for each job. (Note: the controller itself can be deployed to the cloud,
and if you're in a production environment that's the recommended way to use it,
but we suggest you try the examples with a controller that runs locally first.)

When you have a directory with source code, you can just add a `plz.config.json`
file including information such as:

- the location of your Plz server,
- the command you want to run,
- the location of your input data,
- whether you want to request an on-demand instance at a fixed price, or bid for
  spot instances with a ceiling,
- and much more.

Then, just typing `plz run` will run the job for you, either locally or on AWS,
depending on the controller you've started.

## Installation instructions

Chances are you that you have most of the supporting tools already installed, as
these are broadly used tools.

1. Install Git, and Python 3.
   1. On Ubuntu, you can run `sudo apt install git python3 python3-pip`.
   2. On macOS, install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/), then run
      `brew install git python`.
   3. For all other operating systems, you're going to have to Google it.
2. Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/), then restart your
   terminal.
3. Install Docker Compose (`pip install docker-compose`).
4. If you're planning on running code with CUDA, install the
   [NVIDIA Container Runtime for Docker](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).
5. `git clone https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz`, then `cd plz`.
6. Install the CLI by running `./install_cli`.
7. Run the controller (see below).

The first time you run the controller, it will take some time, as it downloads a
"standard" environment which includes Anaconda and PyTorch.

The controller runs in "detached" mode, which means it will carry on running if
you close the terminal, but logs its output to that terminal. We suggest opening
another terminal window to run executions.

### Running executions locally

Once you've set up your system as above, run:

```
./start_local_controller
```

The controller can be stopped at any time with:

```
./stop_controller
```

### AWS configuration

To start a controller that talks to AWS, you'll need to first set up the AWS
CLI:

1. Install the AWS CLI: `pip install awscli`
2. Configure it with your access key: `aws configure`

If you usually use AWS in a particular region, please edit
`aws_config/config.json` and set your region there. The default file sets the
region to _eu-west-1_ (Ireland).

Then run:

```
./start_aws_controller
```

Unless you add `"instance_max_uptime_in_minutes": null,` to your
`plz.config.json`, all AWS instances you start terminate after 60 minutes.
That's on purpose, in case you're just trying the tool and something doesn't go
well (for example, there's a power cut). You can always use `plz list` and
`plz kill` before leaving your computer, as to make sure that there no instances
remaining. For maximum assurance, we recommend checking the state of your
instances in the AWS console.

If you want to run the examples using the AWS instances, be aware that this has
a cost. You can change the value of `"max_bid_price_in_dollars_per_hour": N` in
`plz.config.json` to any value you like. Examples takes around 5 minutes to run.
The value in the provided configs range from \$0.5/hour to \$2/hour (for
GPU-powered machines).

## Examples

### Python

In the directory `examples/python`, there is a minimal example showing how to
run a program with Plz that handles input and output. Once you have a working
controller, running `plz run` should start the job.

### PyTorch

In the directory `examples/pytorch`, there's a full-fledged example for the task
of digit recognition using the classic approach of LeNets and a subset of the
well-known MNIST dataset.

Anything related to Plz is in `main.py`. In fact the most relevant lines are the
following ones:

```python
def get_from_plz_config(key: str, non_plz_value: T) -> T:
    configuration_file = os.environ.get('CONFIGURATION_FILE', None)
    if configuration_file is not None:
        with open(configuration_file) as c:
            config = json.load(c)
        return config[key]
    else:
        return non_plz_value
[...]
    input_directory = get_from_plz_config(
        'input_directory', os.path.join('..', 'data'))
    output_directory = get_from_plz_config('output_directory', 'models')
    parameters = get_from_plz_config('parameters', DEFAULT_PARAMETERS)
    measures_directory = get_from_plz_config('measures_directory', 'measures')
    summary_measures_path = get_from_plz_config(
        'summary_measures_path',
        os.path.join('measures', 'summary'))
```

This shows how to get the input data and parameters that Plz uploads for you.
There's a configuration file whose name comes in the environment variable
`CONFIGURATION_FILE`. If that variable is present, you're running with Plz, and
you can read and parse the file as a JSON object. The object has the following
keys:

- `input_directory` is a directory where you'll find your input data. If you
  have `"input": "file://../data/mnist",` in your `plz.config.json` file, the
  directory `config['input_directory']` will have the same contents that
  `../data/mnist` has locally.
- `output_directory` is directory where you can write files. These are retrieved
  via `plz output`, or downloaded if you keep the CLI running until the end of
  the job.
- `parameters` is the JSON object that you passed with
  `plz run --parameters a_json_file.json`, if you so did. Otherwise it's an
  empty object.
- `measures_directory` is a directory in which you can write measures. You can
  query these with `plz measures`. Each file is interpreted as a property in a
  JSON object, using the file name as the key, and the file contents as the
  value, interpreted as JSON. By writing the code:

  ```python
      with open(os.path.join(measures_directory, f'epoch_{epoch}'), 'w') as f:
          json.dump({'training_loss': training_loss, 'accuracy': accuracy}, f)
  ```

  You can then run:

  ```
  sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz measures
  {
    "epoch_1": {
      "training_loss": 2.1326301097869873,
      "accuracy": 45.4
    },
    "epoch_2": {
      [...]
    }
  }
  ```

- `summary_measures_path` is a path to a file in which you can write a JSON
  object with a summary of the results you obtained in your run (best accuracy,
  total training time, etc.). The summary is available via `plz measures -s`,
  and also printed by the CLI if you wait until the job finishes.

If you want to use CUDA for this example, we have provided an example
configuration file for this purpose:

```
plz -c plz.cuda.config.json run
```

This tells Docker to use the
[CUDA runtime](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).

## Future work

In the future, Plz is intended to:

- add support for named inputs and outputs, and function as a sort of "build
  system" in the cloud, particulary suitable for build pipelines,
- add support for visualisations, such as
  [Tensorboard](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/summaries_and_tensorboard),
- manage epochs to capture intermediate metrics and results, and terminate runs
  early,
- and whatever else sounds like fun.
  ([Please, tell us!](https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz/issues))

## Instructions for developers

### Installing dependencies

1. Run `pip install pipenv` to install [`pipenv`](https://docs.pipenv.org/).
2. Run `make environment` to create the virtual environments and install the
   dependencies.
3. Run `make check` to run the tests.

For more information, take a look at
[the `pipenv` documentation](https://docs.pipenv.org/).

### Using the CLI

See the CLI's
[_README.rst_](https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz/blob/master/cli/README.rst).

### Deploying a test environment

1. Clone this repository.
2. Install [direnv](https://direnv.net/).
3. Create a _.envrc_ file in the root of this repository:
   ```
   export SECRETS_DIR="${PWD}/secrets"
   ```
4. Create a configuration file named _secrets/config.json_ based on
   _example.config.json_.
5. Run `make deploy`.

### Deploying a production environment

Do just as above, but put your secrets directory somewhere else (for example,
another repository, this one private and encrypted).

Commit message:

README: Add the instructions for installing Docker back in.

README.md, after:

# Plz 😸

_Say the magic word._

_Plz_ (pronounced "please") is a job runner targeted at running highly intensive
data processing jobs as simply, systematically, tidily and cheaply as possible.

At Prodo.AI, we use Plz to train our PyTorch-based machine learning models.

_Plz is an experimental product and is not guaranteed to be stable across
versions._

## Highlights

- simple command line interface
- cloud-agnostic architecture (on top of Docker), allowing you to run jobs
  locally, on bare metal, or on the cloud
  - Plz currently supports Amazon Web Services (AWS), but will most likely
    support other cloud providers in the future
  - full control of the type of cloud instance, allowing you to use whatever
    machine fits your job (and budget)
  - full support for NVIDIA GPUs, allowing you to run deep learning experiments
- common tooling support, with the following straight out of the box:
  - Python
  - Anaconda
  - PyTorch
- data-based workflow, so that you don't accidentally compute your model with
  the wrong input
- parameter awareness, so that you can run the same experiment with multiple
  sets of parameters
- full history, so that you can review your experiments over time
- useful examples provided (see the [Examples](#Examples) section)
- MIT-license allowing modification, distribution, private or commercial use
  (see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more details)
- open for contributions, plz

## Usage overview

We offer more details below on how to setup Plz and run your jobs, but we can
start by giving you an overview of what Plz does.

Plz offers a command-line interface. You start by adding a `plz.config.json`
file to the directory where you have your source code. This file contains, among
other things, the command you run to put your program to work (for instance,
`python3 main.py`). Then you can use Plz to run your program with `plz run`. The
following example (provided in this repository) demonstrates this:

```
sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz run
👌 Capturing the files in /home/sergio/plz/examples/pytorch
👌 Building the program snapshot
Step 1/4 : FROM prodoai/plz_ml-pytorch
# Executing 3 build triggers
 ---> Using cache
[...]
---> 9c39e889659d
Successfully built 9c39e889659d
Successfully tagged 024444204267.dkr.ecr.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/plz/builds:some-person-trying-pytorch-mnist-example-1541436382135
👌 Capturing the input
👌 983663 input bytes to upload
👌 Sending request to start execution
Instance status: querying availability
Instance status: requesting new instance
Instance status: pending
[...]
Instance status: starting container
Instance status: running
👌 Execution ID is: 55b66652-e11a-11e8-a36a-233ad251f4c1
👌 Streaming logs...
Using device: cuda
Epoch: 1. Training loss: 2.146302
Evaluation accuracy: 47.90 (max 0.00)
Best model found at epoch 1, with accurary 47.90
Epoch: 2. Training loss: 0.660179
Evaluation accuracy: 83.30 (max 47.90)
Best model found at epoch 2, with accurary 83.30
Epoch: 3. Training loss: 0.251717
Evaluation accuracy: 87.80 (max 83.30)
Best model found at epoch 3, with accurary 87.80
[...]
Epoch: 30. Training loss: 0.010750
Evaluation accuracy: 97.50 (max 98.10)
👌 Harvesting the output...
👌 Retrieving summary of measures (if present)...
{
  "max_accuracy": 98.1,
  "training_loss_at_max": 0.008485347032546997,
  "epoch_at_max": 25,
  "training_time": 43.3006055355072
}
👌 Execution succeeded.
👌 Retrieving the output...
le_net.pth
👌 Done and dusted.
```

From the above output, you'll see Plz do the following:

- Plz captures the files in your current directory. A snapshot of your code is
  built and stored in your infrastructure, so that you can retrieve the code
  used to run your job in the future (yes, you can specify files to be ignored,
  and you do so in the `plz.config.json`).
- It captures input data (as specified in the config) and uploads it. If you run
  another execution with the same input data, it will avoid uploading the data
  for a second time (based on timestamps and hashes).
- It starts an AWS instance, and waits until it's ready (or just runs the
  execution locally depending on the configuration).
- It streams the logs, just as if you were running your program directly.
- It shows metrics you collected during the run, such as _accuracy_ and _loss_
  (you can query those later).
- Finally, it downloads output files you might have created.

You can be patient and wait until it finishes, or you can hit `Ctrl+C` and stop
the program early:

```
Epoch: 9 Training loss: 0.330538
^C
👌 Your program is still running. To stream the logs, type:

        plz logs ad96b586-89e5-11e8-a7c5-8142e2563487
```

Plz runs your commands in a Docker container, either in your AWS infrastructure
or in your local machine, and so your actions in the terminal don't affect the
execution. If you are running this execution only, you can just type `plz logs`
and logs will be streamed from the current moment (unless you specify
`--since=start`, which will tell it to stream from the start of execution).

The big hexadecimal number you see in the output, next to `plz logs`, is the
execution ID you can use to refer to this execution. Plz remembers the last
execution that was _started_, and if you want to refer to that one you don't
need to include it in your command (you can just type `plz logs`). But if you
need to specify the execution ID, you can do `plz logs <execution-id>`.

Once your program has finished (or you've stopped it with `plz stop`) you can
run `plz output`, and it will download the files that your program has written.
In order to use this functionality, you need to tell your program to write to a
specific directory, which is provided to your program as an environment
variable. The files are saved under `output/<execution-id>` by default, but you
can specify the location with the `-p` option.

The instance will be kept there for some time (specified in `plz.config.json`)
in case you're running things interactively (so that you don't need to wait
while the instance goes through the startup process again).

You can use `plz describe` to print metadata about an execution in JSON format.
It's useful to tell one execution from another if you have several running at
the same time.

You can use `plz run --parameters a_json_file.json` to pass parameters to your
program. Passing parameters this way has two advantages:

- the parameters are stored in the metadata and can be queried (see the
  description of `plz history` below)
- you can use `plz rerun --override-parameters some_json_file.json` and run
  exactly the same execution but with different parameters, which helps running
  experiments in a systematic fashion.

There's also `plz history`, returning a JSON mapping from execution IDs to
metadata. If you write JSON files to a specific directory (see
`test/end-to-end/measures/simple`) they will be available in the metadata. You
can store things you've measured during your experiment (for instance, training
loss). Parameters will be in the metadata as well, so you can transform the
metadata using, for instance, [`jq`](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/), and find
out how your training loss changed as you changed your parameters.

```
sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz history | \
    jq 'to_entries[] | { "execution_id": .key,
                         "learning_rate": .value.parameters.learning_rate,
                         "accuracy": .value.measures.summary.max_accuracy }'
{
  "execution_id": "dafcb478-e11e-11e8-9f2c-87dc520968d5",
  "learning_rate": 0.01,
  "accuracy": 98
}
{
  "execution_id": "9cfd3f1a-e1cf-11e8-9449-b1cc03bcdb5f",
  "learning_rate": 0.1,
  "accuracy": 98.5
}
{
  "execution_id": "c0d65d66-e1cf-11e8-8ed8-0d6f99ec4bc3",
  "learning_rate": 0.5,
  "accuracy": 13
}
```

In this example, you can see that increasing the learning rate from `0.01` to
`0.1` gives you an improvement in accuracy from 98% to 98.5%, but further
increasing the learning rate leads to a disastrous decrease to 13%.

You can run `plz list` to list the running executions, as well as any running
instances on AWS. It also shows the instance IDs. You can kill instances with
`plz kill -i <instance-id>`.

The command `plz last` is useful, particularly when writing shell commands, to
get the last execution _started_.

We also make it easy to manage dependencies for projects using Anaconda.
Projects using the image `prodoai/plz_ml-pytorch` need to have an
`environment.yml` file, as the one produced by `conda env export` (see
[the one in the Pytorch example](examples/pytorch/environment.yml)). This file
will be applied on top of
[the environment in the image](base-images/ml-pytorch/environment.yml).
Installation of dependencies is cached, so the process of dependency
installation occurs only the first time after you change the environment file.

### Functionality summary

Plz helps with the gruntwork around managing long-running tasks. It:

1. reruns previous jobs as to make sure the results are repeatable,
2. lets you customise parameters while keeping the work the same, and
3. provides a history including the result and parameters, so that you have
   experiment data in a structured format.

Plz also helps automate cloud-related tasks. It:

4. starts a "worker" (typically on AWS EC2, but also locally) to run your job,
5. packages your code, parameters and data and ships them to the worker,
6. runs your code,
7. saves the results (like losses) and outcomes (like models, but also the
   console output) so that you can back to them in the future, and
8. takes down the worker.

We build Plz following these principles:

- Code and data must be stored for future reference.
- Whatever part of the running environment can be captured by Plz, we capture it
  as to make jobs repeatable.
- Functionality is based on standard mechanisms like files and environment
  variables. You don't need to add extra dependencies to your code or learn how
  to read/write your data in specific ways.
- The tool must be flexible enough so that no unnecessary restrictions are
  imposed by the architecture. You should be able to do with Plz whatever you
  can do by running a program manually. It was surprising to find out how many
  issues, mostly around running jobs in the cloud, could be solved only by
  tweaking the configuration, without requiring any changes to the code.

Plz is routinely used at `prodo.ai` to train ML models on AWS, some of them
taking days to run in the most powerful instances available. We trust it to
start and terminate these instances as needed, and to manage our spot instances,
allowing us to get a much better price than if we were using on-demand instances
all the time.

## How does it work?

Plz consists of a _controller_ service and a _command-line interface_ (CLI) that
issues requests to the controller. The CLI is a Python executable, `plz`, which
takes instructions (such as `plz run ...`) as described above.

There are two configurations of the controller that are ready for you to use: in
one of them your jobs are run locally, while in the other one an AWS instance is
started for each job. (Note: the controller itself can be deployed to the cloud,
and if you're in a production environment that's the recommended way to use it,
but we suggest you try the examples with a controller that runs locally first.)

When you have a directory with source code, you can just add a `plz.config.json`
file including information such as:

- the location of your Plz server,
- the command you want to run,
- the location of your input data,
- whether you want to request an on-demand instance at a fixed price, or bid for
  spot instances with a ceiling,
- and much more.

Then, just typing `plz run` will run the job for you, either locally or on AWS,
depending on the controller you've started.

## Installation instructions

Chances are you that you have most of the supporting tools already installed, as
these are broadly used tools.

1. Install Git, and Python 3.
   1. On Ubuntu, you can run `sudo apt install git python3 python3-pip`.
   2. On macOS, install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/), then run
      `brew install git python`.
   3. For all other operating systems, you're going to have to Google it.
2. Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/), then restart your
   terminal.
   1. On Ubuntu, you can run:
      ```
      curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
      sudo sh get-docker.sh
      sudo usermod -aG docker your-user
      ```
      then restart your terminal.
   2. On macOS, you can use Homebrew to install Docker with
      `brew cask install docker`.
3. Install Docker Compose (`pip install docker-compose`).
4. If you're planning on running code with CUDA, install the
   [NVIDIA Container Runtime for Docker](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).
5. `git clone https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz`, then `cd plz`.
6. Install the CLI by running `./install_cli`.
7. Run the controller (see below).

The first time you run the controller, it will take some time, as it downloads a
"standard" environment which includes Anaconda and PyTorch.

The controller runs in "detached" mode, which means it will carry on running if
you close the terminal, but logs its output to that terminal. We suggest opening
another terminal window to run executions.

### Running executions locally

Once you've set up your system as above, run:

```
./start_local_controller
```

The controller can be stopped at any time with:

```
./stop_controller
```

### AWS configuration

To start a controller that talks to AWS, you'll need to first set up the AWS
CLI:

1. Install the AWS CLI: `pip install awscli`
2. Configure it with your access key: `aws configure`

If you usually use AWS in a particular region, please edit
`aws_config/config.json` and set your region there. The default file sets the
region to _eu-west-1_ (Ireland).

Then run:

```
./start_aws_controller
```

Unless you add `"instance_max_uptime_in_minutes": null,` to your
`plz.config.json`, all AWS instances you start terminate after 60 minutes.
That's on purpose, in case you're just trying the tool and something doesn't go
well (for example, there's a power cut). You can always use `plz list` and
`plz kill` before leaving your computer, as to make sure that there no instances
remaining. For maximum assurance, we recommend checking the state of your
instances in the AWS console.

If you want to run the examples using the AWS instances, be aware that this has
a cost. You can change the value of `"max_bid_price_in_dollars_per_hour": N` in
`plz.config.json` to any value you like. Examples takes around 5 minutes to run.
The value in the provided configs range from \$0.5/hour to \$2/hour (for
GPU-powered machines).

## Examples

### Python

In the directory `examples/python`, there is a minimal example showing how to
run a program with Plz that handles input and output. Once you have a working
controller, running `plz run` should start the job.

### PyTorch

In the directory `examples/pytorch`, there's a full-fledged example for the task
of digit recognition using the classic approach of LeNets and a subset of the
well-known MNIST dataset.

Anything related to Plz is in `main.py`. In fact the most relevant lines are the
following ones:

```python
def get_from_plz_config(key: str, non_plz_value: T) -> T:
    configuration_file = os.environ.get('CONFIGURATION_FILE', None)
    if configuration_file is not None:
        with open(configuration_file) as c:
            config = json.load(c)
        return config[key]
    else:
        return non_plz_value
[...]
    input_directory = get_from_plz_config(
        'input_directory', os.path.join('..', 'data'))
    output_directory = get_from_plz_config('output_directory', 'models')
    parameters = get_from_plz_config('parameters', DEFAULT_PARAMETERS)
    measures_directory = get_from_plz_config('measures_directory', 'measures')
    summary_measures_path = get_from_plz_config(
        'summary_measures_path',
        os.path.join('measures', 'summary'))
```

This shows how to get the input data and parameters that Plz uploads for you.
There's a configuration file whose name comes in the environment variable
`CONFIGURATION_FILE`. If that variable is present, you're running with Plz, and
you can read and parse the file as a JSON object. The object has the following
keys:

- `input_directory` is a directory where you'll find your input data. If you
  have `"input": "file://../data/mnist",` in your `plz.config.json` file, the
  directory `config['input_directory']` will have the same contents that
  `../data/mnist` has locally.
- `output_directory` is directory where you can write files. These are retrieved
  via `plz output`, or downloaded if you keep the CLI running until the end of
  the job.
- `parameters` is the JSON object that you passed with
  `plz run --parameters a_json_file.json`, if you so did. Otherwise it's an
  empty object.
- `measures_directory` is a directory in which you can write measures. You can
  query these with `plz measures`. Each file is interpreted as a property in a
  JSON object, using the file name as the key, and the file contents as the
  value, interpreted as JSON. By writing the code:

  ```python
      with open(os.path.join(measures_directory, f'epoch_{epoch}'), 'w') as f:
          json.dump({'training_loss': training_loss, 'accuracy': accuracy}, f)
  ```

  You can then run:

  ```
  sergio@spaceship:~/plz/examples/pytorch$ plz measures
  {
    "epoch_1": {
      "training_loss": 2.1326301097869873,
      "accuracy": 45.4
    },
    "epoch_2": {
      [...]
    }
  }
  ```

- `summary_measures_path` is a path to a file in which you can write a JSON
  object with a summary of the results you obtained in your run (best accuracy,
  total training time, etc.). The summary is available via `plz measures -s`,
  and also printed by the CLI if you wait until the job finishes.

If you want to use CUDA for this example, we have provided an example
configuration file for this purpose:

```
plz -c plz.cuda.config.json run
```

This tells Docker to use the
[CUDA runtime](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker).

## Future work

In the future, Plz is intended to:

- add support for named inputs and outputs, and function as a sort of "build
  system" in the cloud, particulary suitable for build pipelines,
- add support for visualisations, such as
  [Tensorboard](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/summaries_and_tensorboard),
- manage epochs to capture intermediate metrics and results, and terminate runs
  early,
- and whatever else sounds like fun.
  ([Please, tell us!](https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz/issues))

## Instructions for developers

### Installing dependencies

1. Run `pip install pipenv` to install [`pipenv`](https://docs.pipenv.org/).
2. Run `make environment` to create the virtual environments and install the
   dependencies.
3. Run `make check` to run the tests.

For more information, take a look at
[the `pipenv` documentation](https://docs.pipenv.org/).

### Using the CLI

See the CLI's
[_README.rst_](https://github.com/prodo-ai/plz/blob/master/cli/README.rst).

### Deploying a test environment

1. Clone this repository.
2. Install [direnv](https://direnv.net/).
3. Create a _.envrc_ file in the root of this repository:
   ```
   export SECRETS_DIR="${PWD}/secrets"
   ```
4. Create a configuration file named _secrets/config.json_ based on
   _example.config.json_.
5. Run `make deploy`.

### Deploying a production environment

Do just as above, but put your secrets directory somewhere else (for example,
another repository, this one private and encrypted).
